---
title: Puzzles are a Part of What Makes us Human
layout: post
---

In this post, I want to explore why puzzles are so near to what makes us uniquely human. I'll do this by reflecting on my own experience with puzzles, especially a pivot I made in my thirties from being wary of them to embracing them. I'll finish up with a few thoughts on how these truths should affect education and our outlook on life in general.

## Learning Patience

In my youth I really had no patience for puzzles. I would try for a little bit, get confused, and either look up the answer or abandon the effort. It's with great regret that I look back on this now and realize how much fun I cheated myself out of. I lacked what the ed lingo now terms a _growth mindset_: I was convinced rather that if I didn't get a particular puzzle right away, the case was hopeless and I'd never understand.

Nevertheless, puzzles held a persistent fascination for me. I kept coming back to them, hoping that one would "click" for me in the way that others didn't. I spent a good deal of time boggling at the lush environments of the original 1993 _Myst_; I bought the pendant that granted me access to [The Stone](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Stone_(video_game)) (those wonderful puzzles are preserved [here](https://www.scarecrowsfield.com)); we owned a Mensa puzzle omnibus and tuned in for the Car Talk puzzler on the weekends. The game show Jeopardy! was a family passion, but otherwise we didn't go in much for trivia.

It was at the age of six that I was introduced to that infinite puzzle, chess. My dad was rather adept, and we played regularly, at a rate of maybe two or three games a week, usually in the evenings, my dad with a big cup of coffee and an American Spirit cigarette. I would beat him for the first time at the age of sixteen, racking up probably some one thousand losses in a row over the period of a decade. The frustration was immense, but for some reason I stuck with it in a way that I failed to with all else. Somehow, despite failure after failure, _something_ nourished me with the hope that I could improve and ultimately prevail. 

A part of it, no doubt, was that there were books to study. The game could be researched &mdash; not in the way of looking up a walkthrough for _Myst_ or a big hint for _The Stone_, which spoiled the fun, but rather in a way that deepened one's understanding and pleasure in the game. Even if the losses continued, perhaps the tactics and strategies I picked up along the way were enough to make me aware that I was, in fact, improving, getting harder to beat.

Then also, I did sometimes play people other than my father, and found out not everybody was as hard to beat as he was. If I knew I couldn't beat my dad, at least I could beat my older brother, uncle, cousin, or an acquaintance at the coffeeshop, and got the sense that skill in this realm did exist on a kind of spectrum that you could move up or down. 

## The Rediscovery

Once I could beat my father with some regularity, I became pretty content with my chess abilities and stopped trying to improve. Nor did climbing the chess hill make me more inclined to attempt the other types of puzzles that still stymied me. On the contrary, I remained pretty indifferent to them until I rediscovered them in my thirties and began to develop a great passion for them. Nowadays, though, I take great enjoyment in all types of puzzles &mdash; I even revisted and worked through _Myst_ (in the gorgeous Unreal Engine-powered remake) and am now tackling _Riven_, though I have also discovered an appreciation for everything from crosswords to the temple puzzles in the last two _Zelda_ games.

Particularly &mdash; and I think herein lies the explanation for my change of heart &mdash; I have developed an interest in programming puzzles, everything from [Project Euler](https://projecteuler.net) and [Codewars](https://www.codewars.com) to the yearly [Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com) and the classic [Python Challenge](http://www.pythonchallenge.com). Something about the purity of programming puzzles &mdash; the well-designed ones, at least, lack any arbitrary constraints, being limited only by the coherence of the logic with which you write the programs &mdash; helped me arrive at one of the most important realizations of my adult life.

The realization is just this: the process of solving any problem is basically algorithmic. That is to say, the process of solving any problem (of which puzzles are a subset) consists in figuring out how to create a mechanism to derive the appropriate outputs from the inputs given. The wonderful thing about a well-designed programming puzzle is that the actual operation to be performed is often extremely simple, and yet the challenge lies in giving a computer a precise set of instructions corresponding to that apparently trivial operation &mdash; like "add up every other prime number in the first one thousand prime numbers." Nothing could be easier to describe &mdash; that is, until you attempt to describe it with the clarity needed for computation! You know you'll need:

1. Some way of generating primes;
2. A way of counting them;
3. A way of telling the computer what you mean by "every other."

&mdash; and so you proceed to solve each of these sub-problems in turn. Perhaps you decide to solve `1.` with an algorithm like the [Sieve of Eratosthenes](https://ianamo.github.io/2023/03/24/implementing-eratostothenes.html), or some such, and so on. At every step of the process, the rigorous clarity required makes you feel that you've grasped more deeply every step of the deceptively trivial problem.

But here's the really big payoff, what made the huge difference to me &mdash; you _also_ realize that the procedure you used to _create_ the algorithm is _itself_ an algorithm! Some people have described it as the "master" algorithm: perhaps we could also call it the MOAA (Mother of All Algorithms). It consists in this recursive process (which is not original to me, but I can't remember where I first saw it):

1. Try to solve problem `x` directly. 
2. If solution works, great! Else, the problem is too complicated: break it into sub-problems `x1`, `x2`, etc.
3. Apply steps `1-2` to sub-problems.

And that's really all it takes to solve anything solvable &mdash; be it a puzzle, or what have you. Once I grasped it, it seemed so obvious, and yet how much time I had wasted for want of this basic insight!

## Homo Algorithmus

Indeed, what more important takeaway could there be in any education than the fact that the MOAA exists and can be applied to anything with enough time and patience? Indeed, to look at it from another vantage, what lays claim to being more fundamentally human than the MOAA and our (explicit or sometimes intuitive) grasp of it? It's the underlying basis for the geometry of Euclid, the insights of Eratosthenes or Ptolemy into the nature of the planet and the universe, the laws of physics developed by Newton and Einstein, the foundations of computation developed by Babbage, Lovelace, and Turing, and the resolution of essentially every technical problem creating everything from the lightbulb to GPS.

The human being is thus _homo algorithmus_, the algorithm-making being &mdash; and perhaps more importantly, the being who realizes that the recursive procedure for generating algorithms is itself algorithmic. Educators do not stress it as much, but I would think the MOAA is at least as important as a growth mindset; it's fine and well to have confidence in your potential to be more than you are, but if that's combined with the conviction that complex problems are fundamentally intractable (or an ignorance of what types of procedures _make_ them tractable), surely the best growth mindset will be unavailing. 

Ultimately, then, the beauty of puzzles lies close to what makes us distinctively human. We can not only solve problems but invent problems for others to solve because of this unique feature of our consciousness. It was said that the founder of Mensa was a little disappointed when it turned out that when you throw a bunch of geniuses in a room together they spend a lot of time playing games. He had expected to create a kind of brains trust to solve the world's problems, and so this tendency struck him as a bit unserious. Perhaps, though, he wasn't being quite fair &mdash; it makes sense that human beings that are exemplary in doing something so distinctively human would rejoice to practice it with each other. 

I shall finish then with an exhortation &mdash; go out and be human! Solve a problem for the sheer pleasure of solving it (that is to say, go work a puzzle), or even invent one for others to solve. Celebrate the MOAA, and keep it top of mind when problems seem intractably complex. Long live _homo algorithmus_!